Yeah, okay, thanks, Rowling.
First of all, I'd just like to ask you a personal question about how you got started back in science fiction years ago.
Oh, I got started reading it or how I got started writing it?
Reading it way back when you were in your teenage years.
Oh, that's kind of interesting.
Most people don't believe this story, but I actually discovered science fiction when I was wandering around a garbage dump.
There was a garbage dump a few blocks from our house, and I liked it at that time when I was, I guess, about 10 or 11 or something.
Sometimes friends and I would just go down and look around to see what people were drawing out.
And one day among things we found people had thrown out a couple of old pulp magazines from the year before.
Amazing stories, and I think there was one amazing story and one fantastic adventure, supposed to be in companion magazines.
And I grabbed those and brought them home, and I loved them. I got hooked right there.
I started looking for the magazines on the newsstand, and of course found there were a whole lot of other magazines on the newsstand.
To find out stories, and to start with stories, and to start with things thrilling winter stories, weird tales, and began buying all of them almost immediately.
Okay, what about how you got involved in the fan movement, the fan structure?
Well, I grew up directly out of the reading of the pulp magazines, because at that time every magazine being published had a letter column,
usually a long letter column full of letters from the readers saying what they had thought of the previous issue.
And often asking for correspondence, and their addresses would be published there, so I began writing to anybody who was living around the San Francisco area where I was living then.
And got into correspondence with, I guess, about two or three different people.
And through them, I got in touch with the local science fiction club, the Golden Gate Recurian Society, and I joined that.
And at the same time, of course, a number of the magazines were running fanzines or view columns.
And I simply sent off a bunch of fanzines, and immediately began writing for them.
At that time, the first thing, of course, I was writing were amateur science fiction stories, which were quite terrible, but a whole lot of them got published in those early fanzines.
And shortly thereafter, began branching out and doing other things, critical articles and things like that.
I don't think I actually published a fanzine for several years, it was in 1952 when I published my first one.
I was too young, I didn't have any money, and no experience and things like that.
So I gradually worked my way into publishing fanzines.
And during the 50s and then on through the 60s, I was very prolific at publishing fanzines.
I still do publish them occasionally, but not too often these days, because I simply don't have time.
I know this is an obvious question, but I imagine a lot of our listeners may not know this.
Could you just briefly explain what a fanzine is?
Yeah, fanzines are amateur magazines, usually not published for profit, not even with hope of profit, published by readers of science fiction.
Usually, dealing either directly or indirectly with science fiction itself.
Articles on science fiction, articles on science fiction writers or science fiction fans themselves.
And sometimes, just on the things that interest science fiction fans, because of course the people who read science fiction have a wide variety of interests.
But the particular interests of science fiction fans tend to be more intellectual, more scientifically oriented.
So that it's worthwhile for science fiction readers to publish things and just get in contact with other people who read the same things they do and think about the same things as they do.
A typical science fiction fan, especially in the 50s, before science fiction was nearly as popular as it is today, was somebody who didn't know anybody else,
had never met anybody else who was interested in science fiction.
Probably most people who knew him or her were about that they were crazy or had terribly bad taste or something like that.
So it was always fun to get in touch with other people who read the same things you did.
And the fan movement grew out of that. The fan movement actually started about 1930.
But of course I came in pretty late on that. It was going for a long time before I ever got into it.
Okay, Hugo, I believe in 1959 for the best fan publication or something of that sort. Could you explain this?
Yeah, I was publishing with a friend of mine named Ronnie, like a fanzine called Fanac, which is science fiction.
Mr. Carr?
Yeah.
Hold on, please. We have a technical problem on this hand.
Alright. That's very strange. Okay. As soon as I told you we had a technical problem, we no longer had the technical problem.
I'll be right back. Hang on.
Okay.
What happened when you touched that? Didn't you do it?
No, it happened in between one of your questions. We've got a problem with this line right here.
But it doesn't give us any problem unless you move it while you're talking.
Why don't you just don't move it, you thing, do you?
Okay.
So, where are we?
You were, I think, in the middle of your answer about the Hugo for Fanac.
Why don't we just start that one again because we missed about a 30-second honk of it there.
Okay. In 1958, I started publishing a science fiction fanzine, news magazine, called Fanac, which is science fiction language for fan activity.
I was publishing with a friend of mine named Ronnie, like, who was since died.
And we were reporting on the things that other fans were doing.
The fanzines were publishing conventions that were coming up, things like that, people who were getting married and children born, things like that.
Sometimes we would report also on the things science fiction writers were writing or publishers were doing, magazines that were starting up or dying at the time.
But we didn't concentrate on that because there were other science fiction fanzines that were devoted specifically to news about science fiction itself.
And they were well-established at that time, so we didn't want to compete with them.
We concentrated on fandom itself.
And we were publishing it every week, like clockwork.
And it became very popular.
It became a point where, I don't know, everybody who got it said, this is an indispensable thing to have if you're going to be in fandom because you'll never know what's going on, et cetera.
It was a time when there were a lot of controversies going on in fandom, and we were reporting on those.
And a lot of people got involved in it.
And indeed, it was very important fanzine for its time.
It also became popular because we didn't just report on the news.
We also commented on it, and we were rather, how shall I say, sarcastic, ironic.
We didn't treat it with total seriousness.
We thought something was absolutely silly.
We would say so, and we would make fun of things.
And people liked that aspect of it.
So a little over a year after we actually started the fanzine, we received the U-Brow award as the best fanzine of the year.
That was given to us in 1959.
Okay, good.
For just a little while, I'd like to go into your editing career.
I believe from 1964 to 1971, you edited for Ace.
Could you tell me what you did for that?
Yeah, in 1964, I went to work for Ace Books as an editorial assistant.
Which actually meant that I was low-man on the totem pole era.
I was simply somebody who copyrighted his manuscripts, went over them to make sure the spelling was correct and things like that.
There were no type of graphical errors.
And then proofread the books before they actually got published to make sure once again that there were no type of graphical errors in the tight setting.
I would write blurb, cover copy, kind of, you know, the things that are written on the front and back covers of paperback books to try to get you to be interested enough in the book to buy it.
And at the same time, I was reading a number of submissions that were coming in.
If I saw something good, I would pass it on to the editors.
So it was Battle Bull Time.
Now the editor of Dahl's books.
And gradually as things went along, I just got more and more involved in that.
And worked my way up into the company of a lot of my suggestions for things that I thought we ought to be doing.
We're taking seriously.
And Ace Books then did start doing a number of things that I had suggested.
So I began getting dissent at the motion.
I think after about the first three years, I became a senior editor there.
And began a series called the Ace Science Fiction Special, which was very much a departure for Ace Books in particular, but for the entire field for that matter.
Because it was specifically designed to publish adult science fiction novels, not simply juvenile adventure, but serious novels using the science fiction genre as its format.
And packaged uniformly so that people would be able to recognize a new book in the series when it came out.
And packaged in such a way that, you know, it didn't have monsters chasing half-naked women on the covers.
We had very good artwork by a team of artists called Leo and Diane Dillon.
Who later won a Hugo Award and won two Call the Cod Awards.
God knows what else they were extremely good artists.
I also began anthologizing very early when I started there.
Don Wolfe and I were collaborating on an anthology and an annual anthology called World's Best Science Fiction.
And I gradually branched out from that.
That began to have my name on anthologies.
I began to do others for Double Day and Bosset Books and so on.
And that was actually how I got my start doing anthologies was the work that I was doing in Ace Books.
Okay, good. That answered a lot of the other questions I would have about Ace too.
How many series, say the Universe series or the Best Science Fiction of the Year, how many continuing series anthologies are you doing right now?
Right now I'm doing exactly three.
I'm doing the Universe series of which number 12 will be published in June by Double Day.
I'm doing the Best Science Fiction of the Year of which number 11 will be published in July by Times Cave and Pay-for-Vac.
And I'm doing Fantasy Annual of which number five will be published in November, I believe, by Times Cave.
Fantasy Annual is another Best of the Year but that is devoted to fantasy.
I occasionally do individual anthologies too but mostly I try to concentrate on those series books.
Weren't you doing one too, the Best Science Fiction of the Year?
Yeah, I did two volumes of the Best Science Fiction of the Year a few years ago.
And they simply did not sell well enough.
Evidently people wanted to have a greater variety in the length of their stories but they were reading.
They didn't want to have five novellas all in one book.
They wanted to have maybe two or three novellas and a novel that's a short story, all stuck together.
So after the first two books when that experiment didn't prove to be successful it was simply dropped.
And I moved to Best Science Fiction of the Year from the publishers of Best Science Fiction of the Year who were Valentine Del Rey books
over to Times Cave books and lengthened the book from I think it was 125,000 words I was doing at that time.
I lengthened it to 150,000 words so that I could put in one or two more novellas.
And now I'm doing a much more balanced book than I was ever doing before.
Eventually what I'm doing now is both of those books put together.
Okay, the Universe series, now that's totally original science fiction, right?
Yes it is, that's right.
Could you explain the difference say to an author, I'm kind of hazy on this, like an author who has a story to sell.
What's the difference between selling to an original anthology like that or a magazine like Analog or Amazing or something?
There are all sorts of differences.
There are both artistic and monetary differences.
The one thing, if you sell to a magazine then the money that you get from the magazine is simply the payment for that use of the story.
If you sell it to an original anthology that's going into a book and you get an advance payment.
But after that you get a share of the royalties.
If the book sells well then there will be additional earnings on the book.
And the individual authors will continue to make money for years thereafter and indeed they do on Universe because it does sell pretty well.
So your chances of making money on your story are at least as good I would say in the original anthologies as they are in the science fiction magazines.
Aside from that there's also the fact that a lot of writers simply like to have their work appear in book form because they know it's going to be around to be read longer than a magazine will be.
It will stay in better shape and it will be in library or things like that.
And there's also a certain cachet, a certain prestige to appearing in one of the original anthologies.
Because over the years the original anthologies have proven to be a source of much if not most of the best science fiction being published.
So that automatically if you sell to Universe or to New Dimensions one of the other original anthologies series you know that your work is going to be appearing along with much of the other best work to appear in the year.
And you also know that people are going to be looking for those books and expecting to find the best work.
So that if you have a really good story for instance and maybe you think you have a chance at winning an award or a new goer or something like that.
Your chances are somewhat enhanced if you're in one of these original anthologies because people who are looking for the really top stories think of those first.
And I think possibly they tend to think of what has appeared in those first also when it comes time to nominate these things.
Or it may just be that the best stories do appear in those books.
But in any case I once did a breakdown of where the stories of the past ten years that have won nebulas and or hugos had appeared.
And there's a disproportionate amount I think it's something like 40% of them had appeared in original stories anthologies.
Okay what about what about an editor's say your function as the editor of the Universe series.
I mean do you actively seek stories do you editorially comment and ask for changes in the stories like what would be the difference between you doing that and say an editor for a magazine.
There's not a great deal of difference between what I do as an editor and what a magazine editor will do.
We both will work with an author if a story seems good enough to sell to us but not quite right we want a few changes.
Then of course we'll discuss them with the author and see if the author agrees and wants to make those changes.
There's no difference there.
The prime difference between the way I work well two differences between the way I work and the way magazine editors work.
Number one a magazine editor has a deadline every month to get a magazine out.
So the magazine editor really has to have a certain number of stories to publish every month whether or not enough really top stories have come in.
The editor still has to publish the magazine.
I don't have that problem.
I get a contract and I have about six months to put together a book.
It usually takes me about two or three months to get enough stories that if I need to pull six months I can do that.
So I don't have a tight deadline and I can keep my standards higher.
Secondarily I work differently from most of the magazine editors in that I have more time because I'm only doing one book a year to go around to specific authors and ask them for a story that they're working on.
They may not have that story ready for another three, four or six months but I can talk to them in advance and say well I'll be buying next April or something like that.
So please send it to me then.
Most of the stories that I get on submission are from people I know either personally or through the mail as writers from whom I've solicited stories.
Whereas the magazines try to do that but they're very heavily overworked editors at the magazines because they have these kinds of deadlines.
And they don't have time as much time as I do anyway to go after individual authors and ask for stories.
So I think there's a higher percentage of stories that I buy from authors I ask for stories by.
Okay on the Best Science Fiction of the Year series, could you just tell me a little bit about the criteria you use to pick stories?
Do you go simply for only for the best stories or do you look for balance?
Do you look for the names or what kind of criteria do you have?
I go about 90% for the best stories.
The names don't bother me because it always turns out that most of the best stories are by name writers.
This is how they became name writers in the first place by writing good stories.
As I read during the year, all year long, sort of day by day, week by week, month by month,
every time I read a story that I think is a particularly good story,
a candidate for the best science fiction of the year, whether or the fantasy annual, the best fantasy of the year.
I make a card and I put it in the card file and that card will tell me the title of the author word,
and it will tell me how long it is and give a brief trace of the plot.
At the end of the year, I simply go through those cards and pick out what I consider to be the best 150,000 words out of that.
Then I look at that to see what the editorial balance is like.
I do want to be sure that there aren't too many stories that are down-beat and depressing because that's just not fun to read.
There may be good stories individually, but you just string them all end to end and they can actually seem not as good as they are.
So I try to work on that kind of balance and I try to mix up the balance between longer stories and shorter stories
because people do like variety in that.
And if it should ever happen for instance, I think the best 15 stories of the year, however many it takes,
are all time travel stories for instance.
I'm not going to publish a whole book full of time travel stories, that's just silly.
Again, people would get tired of reading so many time travel stories in one book.
So I try to mix up the themes too.
But the editorial balance is really something that I do after I've chosen the best stories themselves
and rarely does it make a great deal of difference in the balance of the book itself.
Usually there is a lot of variety in all of these things already so that I don't have to take too much.
Okay, could you just give me maybe a little philosophy or theory behind an anthology?
What kind of need does it fill?
Kind of a vague question.
As Beth Dino's an anthology fills the need for people who want to read good science fiction short stories,
novel lessons, novellas, whatever.
People who want to read something other than a novel.
Probably people who want to have something that they can dip into from time to time
rather than sitting down and reading the whole thing straight through as they would a novel.
There's a different psychology between reading novels and short stories
and most people do prefer to read novels.
They always sell better than anthologies or single-loss short story collections.
But there are people who like the short stories.
I do, for instance.
And there are the people who buy these.
For a reprint anthology, I think like the best science fiction of the year
or some other kind of anthology, the theme anthology that comes out.
A whole bunch of stories about robots or something like that.
On a reprint anthology, the attraction I think is that these stories have been doubly screened.
They're stories that were good enough in the first place to sell to the magazine.
And then beyond that, they're the best stories from the magazine.
So the people who pick up an anthology can reasonably expect that that is going to contain
more good stories than the average issue of a science fiction magazine.
This is always true. There's very bad anthologies and there's very good issues in magazines.
But by and large, that is the case, I think.
Okay, I know you've done a lot of theme or specialized anthologies.
I have a whole list of them here in front of me.
I just wanted to say pick out a couple and ask a question on them.
This earlier one called Science Fiction for People Who Hate Science Fiction.
How did you go about picking those stories?
That was my first anthology that I did under my own name and nobody else's name.
It was, I think, in fact, the second anthology I did right after the first world-best science fiction.
And the idea, I wanted a book that could be given to people who don't normally read science fiction.
Who think that they wouldn't like it.
And I wanted, first, that the story should be good stories.
And second, that the story should be accessible to people who don't know the specialized language of science fiction.
There are a whole lot of assumptions that are just automatic in science fiction
and nobody bothers to explain them anymore.
So there are a lot of stories that are published these days
that really require a certain amount of background in reading science fiction in order to understand them.
I mean, nobody stops to explain what a star warp drive is anymore
because that gets a little bit tiresome after a while.
We all know how a star warp drive works, more or less.
Or at least we think we do.
But to somebody who's never heard of that before, that can be kind of confusing.
Or the intricacies of the morality of robot behavior
or the strangeness of time paradoxes.
Things like that can be very confusing to someone first coming to science fiction.
So the stories that I chose for that book were stories that had very simple dramatic ideas
that were very easy to understand to someone who was not used to science fiction right away
but that were also very good stories.
And the theory on the book was that people would buy that a number of them would simply buy it for themselves
and also a number that would buy it to give to friends there in hopes of convincing them that they might like science fiction too.
And the book sold pretty well.
In fact, it's still in print in a small paperback edition.
I think it was published about 16 years ago.
It's still in print.
Good. Yeah, I was going to ask if it was still in print.
Yeah, it's in print from, I think it's a Collier's book.
Okay, another one I had a brief question on was a more recent one,
Dreams Edge, Science Fiction Stories about the Future of the Planet Earth.
I understand that was done sort of with the Sierra Club.
Could you explain the origin or the impetus for that one?
Yeah, the origin of that was that the Sierra Club themselves decided they wanted to publish science fiction anthology
and they looked around for someone to do it and they eventually landed on me,
partly because I was known as an anthologist and partly because Sierra Club's main office was in San Francisco and I lived nearby.
So they got in touch with me and we discussed the book.
And I went ahead and put it together.
The main problem I had with that book was that there were too many stories in it that were downbeat and depressing.
If you start writing about the ecology of Earth, which is what the theme of that was,
well, everything's going wrong these days, as you know, and nobody really has any answers about what we can do about it.
And if people picked up that book to find that science fiction writers had the answers that were going to save us,
they were going to be disappointed because there simply aren't any.
If there were any answers, it wouldn't be in a science fiction book, you know,
it would be something that was being done already.
So even though I think all the stories in there are very good,
there are only a few of them that hold out a whole lot of hope.
Most of them are about the problem and the irony of messing around with the environment and so on.
I have to confess I haven't been able to find that book. Is it in paperback?
Yeah, it's in a trade paperback, again, from Sierra Club Book.
Okay, I'm a member of the Sierra Club too. I just haven't been able to get ahold of the head.
No, I expect you can get it. It's probably in the back of somewhere.
It's only published about a year and a half ago.
Okay, would it be fair to ask you?
They did very small hard-cover printing times. Sure, that's out of print.
So the paperback has a much larger printing.
Okay. Could I ask you if you have any particular favorites among the anthologies you put together?
Yeah, I have as a matter of fact, a number of them were favorites of mine, I think.
Oh, there are a number of the best science fiction of the year volumes that I think are extremely good, just because they were very good years.
A lot of good stories appeared in those years.
I couldn't tell you the exact numbers of the exact years, but there were some in the early 70s, for instance.
One or two of the more recent ones, some of the ones from the late 60s, I think, are extremely good.
There's one that had two novelettes by Roger Zalazzo, who was just starting out in science fiction,
was writing at the height of his power, and a bunch of other good stories.
But aside from that, there's an anthology that I did for Harper and Row about five years ago,
called Classic Science Fiction of the First Golden Age,
which is a big, thick anthology of stories from 1940 to 1942,
which is generally considered the time that science fiction first became really good.
And I run back and read every one of the magazines published in those three years, and there were very many of those magazines.
And I chose all of the stories that I considered the best, most of which turned out to be pretty well-known stories,
their classic stories, by his bootstrap, the Robert A. Heinlein, and the Twalkie by Henry Cuthner, and so on.
But at the same time, I also did a lot of research on the writers, on the editors, the publishing companies, the artists, and so forth,
the conditions under which they worked, how much money they were actually able to make.
And I wrote a great deal of introductory material, background material about the writers and what they were doing,
how they came to write each individual story.
I interviewed these writers, either in person or by mail.
I looked through all the old magazines or whatever was said there.
And since I collect old fanzines, I had a lot of the fan magazines that were published in the early 1940s,
so that I had more or less direct information there, too, about what was happening.
And I think the anthology itself contains a number of just classic stories.
It's a basic anthology for anybody's science fiction library.
But in addition to that, that background material is fascinating, tells a whole lot of things about how things happen and why they happen,
and also tells a number of pretty amusing stories about things that went on behind the scenes.
I really enjoyed doing the book.
I'm familiar with that one. I've read that that's considered to be one of your best.
Let me ask you one more question about your work as an editor.
How does a freelance editor work anyhow?
Do you make contracts with the authors and give them payment and then go to the publisher?
What are the mechanics of that?
The mechanics are, at first I sell a book to the publisher.
There's no way I can make a contact with the author unless I have some money to offer.
So I go to the publisher first.
The publisher buys it and gives me a contact which guarantees me a certain amount of money, whatever it is,
and he gives me a book.
And I then do my buying from the authors and make individual contracts with them.
Okay, that explains it.
If you have a little more time, I'd like to go on to just a little bit about your own writing.
Sure, go.
Okay, from what I understand, you had your first professional story published in 1962.
What, Who Sups with the Devil?
I believe it was.
Okay, could you tell me the, oh I don't know about when you decided you wanted to become a professional writer
and how you got the first story published.
Just a little bit about that.
Yeah, in 1961, I had been living in the Bay Area.
And I suddenly decided I was going to just leave the Bay Area.
I didn't like the way life was going.
Here I wasn't doing anything.
I was 24 years old, didn't really have a direction to my life yet.
So I went to New York City to visit with a friend of mine for a month or however long.
And as soon as I got there, I thought, well, do you ever have a job?
I really ought to do something to make some money.
And I had been writing science fiction stories, as I said earlier, since I was a kid, since I was 11 years older.
So I turned back to writing science fiction.
And at one point, I had a copy of that story, Who Sups with the Devil.
And I was actually working on another story.
That story was on submission with a magazine, which wanted to buy it, but they weren't sure they were going to have a second issue or not.
So I was kind of on hold.
And the editor of Fantasy and Science Fiction, Arvind Davidson, came into the office where I was working.
It was an office where a number of us were working.
And he had just become the editor, in fact, that day.
And he came in to announce to us that he was the new editor of Fantasy and Science Fiction.
And he saw that I was working.
I said, well, this is the one I'm working on now is in finished, but I do have this other one.
And I showed him the carbon copy of that.
He went into the other room and read it and came back in five minutes and said he liked it and knew it's buy it, which totally blew my mind.
You know, if a guy just walks in the door and buys you a first story like that.
So he took that.
And in fact, he bought the next half dozen stories that I wrote.
In fact, thereafter, I haven't written a single story since that time that I haven't eventually been able to sell.
I don't have any story sitting in my trunk, you know, that are unsalvageable or anything like that.
Okay.
One thing that's puzzling me a little bit.
In 1973, you've got another Hugo, which I believe was for the best fan writer of the year.
That's right. Yeah.
How can you be considered a fan when you've been publishing professional science fiction?
There's nothing stopping you from being a fan just because you make your money writing professionally.
I didn't get that award for the stories that I was publishing in professional magazines.
I got that for the material that I was writing for amateur magazines because I had to stop doing that.
I'm still interested in the amateur field. It's quite different from the professional field.
And I had written a number of things the previous year, enough things that people liked that I managed to win that award that year.
A lot of other people who have won that award are professionals and were professionals at the time that they won it.
The first, Hugo, who was the best fan writer, went to Alexei Panshin, who was a professional at the time.
The second one to Ted White, who was a professional at the time.
And among the other people who have won it have been Bob Shaw, who's won it twice.
He's been writing professionally for about 15 years.
And a number of other professional writers have won it.
People who have never sold professionally have also won it.
It's really just a matter of doing work in the amateur magazines, work that you give away for nothing, essentially, that you do for love.
As opposed to work that you write for money.
Okay, that's good enough.
Your last novel, I guess it was published in 1977, Cirque.
I've admired that book for some time.
I know what the word Cirque means, I think, but I'm not sure why you picked it for the title. Could you explain that?
I picked it for the title because I couldn't think of a better title, actually.
And the more I thought about it, the more I realized that that was the inevitable title of the book.
The book, of course, is about a city which is built around a gigantic chasm into the ground.
And so the city is named Cirque, which is French for circle, and has other connotations, too.
It also, for instance, is the French word for circus.
And it was kind of a circus, there were a whole lot of strange things going on at once in the book.
And the construction of the book is circular.
It starts at dawn on one day, and it goes ahead to finish at dawn the next day.
And it finishes at the same place in the city where it began with the same characters there.
So in all those ways, Cirque or circle was the perfect title for the book.
The only thing it really had going against it is that nobody knows how to pronounce it, or at least nobody is sure how to pronounce it.
Yeah, I teach English here at Odessa College, and I'm very sensitive to the way books are put together.
And I was very impressed with the tight structure of that, the coherence and the way you interwoven with the various characters and brought them together at the end was just fascinating to me.
It was very difficult to do because I didn't have an outline for the book.
I was making it up as I went along, and the closer I got to the end, the more panicked I got, whether or not I was actually going to be able to pull it off.
I actually had to do two drafts of it to make sure that it worked out properly.
I think it did. In fact, it worked out so neatly in the second to final draft that I actually had to go back through the ending and make a few things not quite as neat as they had been because it seemed a little bit too tight.
Yeah, you said you weren't following a plan and so forth, but I got the impression you were deliberately injecting symbolism or almost kind of an allegory into it with, say, the abyss that collects all the filth and the garbage and breathes these monsters which later turn into flowers and so forth.
Were you deliberately attempting a symbolic structure?
Oh yes, that is definitely deliberate. I knew the general outline of the story. I just didn't know the specifics of who was going to do what at which time and where they were going to be and so on.
The symbolism is built into the whole concept of the story.
And I tried not to make that show too much on the top. I wanted the surface to be a story that was interesting in and of itself because I don't believe that symbolism itself should ever try to carry a story that's worth any tears.
On the other hand, if you have a good story up front and beneath that story is symbolism, preferably emotional symbolism, not just intellectual cuteness. I think that strengthens the story a good deal.
There's a fair amount of symbolism in my short story too.
Okay, at the end of that story it seems like everyone is better off. Nicky, the girl with the multiple personalities, Annaly, the telepath, Jamie, Dorianne, they all discovered something it seems. Could you explain what it is that they found out?
Essentially what it is that they found out is that reality is what you make of it through various means. On the surface again it was a matter of coming to realize that you could make these monsters into flowers.
This sounds silly when we talk about it, see where I don't like to talk about my plot. You could turn monsters into flowers if you by thinking of them as flowers as something beautiful and good and pleasing because of the nature of the monster.
But in other ways, all of the characters come to realize that they have control over their own lives. They can look at their lives any way they want them, they can do anything that they want.
So they all, in one way or another, by the end of the book, have made positive choices in their own minds as a result of the adventures they've gone through during the story.
I know it must be difficult for an author to get questions like that on his own work, but let me try one more on that book, The Millipede.
He was part, well I guess he was my favorite character in the book, he seemed to be all-molting and in control of the situation and so forth.
Why was he necessary for these people? Why couldn't these people have found out what they needed to know without his part in the story?
So that again is built into the idea of the story. Actually he was there because I just love writing about aliens because I love writing about strange minds about death.
And that particular alien, by the way, is not a he, it's an it. And I was very careful not to say he anywhere in there. It's an alien who doesn't have any particular effect.
But anyway, that alien sees time, both the future and the past, always happening at once.
And the alien is not so much in control of the situation as simply knowing what's going to happen and accepting it because it's inevitable the future is as inevitable as the past to this alien.
And the alien doesn't actually control what goes on, but the alien is a catalyst. Just as for instance, I think it's Annaly who is the telepathic monitor, is the ultimate catalyst.
Because it is she who broadcasts telepathically to the other people, her vision of exactly what can happen to make things work out better at the end.
So it isn't really the Militeed who does it, but had the Militeed not been there, things would have happened differently.
Because the Militeed had its effect on Annaly and so forth, and all the other characters.
On the other hand, the Militeed could not be there because, as the book has set out, the Militeed was there. The Militeed knows it.
The Militeed, for instance, at one point takes a great risk of getting killed, but the Militeed knows what's going to happen to it and knows that risk and the pain that goes with it is going to happen.
And indeed, the Militeed doesn't have any... The Militeed is the only character in the book who has no self-polition in that the Militeed knows exactly what the future holds and his power was to change it.
Whereas the other people who are unable to see what the future holds do have the power to change things, and that's one of the things that actually comes out of the book.
I don't think anybody's actually noticed that about this book, but most of the people have happy endings because they take over control of their own lives.
The Militeed has a happy ending simply because the Militeed... What happens to the Militeed was always going to be a happy ending and the Militeed knew it.
I don't know if that's coherent, but it's difficult to talk about these kind of things.
It's very difficult to work with that concept in the book and try to make it coherent in the book. I think it works in the book because you can follow what happens in the story.
No, I can follow that. I got that out of the book personally.
Just a second, David, do we have to change tape now?
Yeah.
Listen, I have about five or ten more minutes. Could you give us that much more?
Sure.
Okay, David, have to switch the tape just a second. We've got to turn it around.